Project Gutenberg's Poems: Pastoral and Psalm, by Benjamin Copeland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Poems: Pastoral and Psalm

Author: Benjamin Copeland

Release Date: March 5, 2016 [EBook #51367]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS: PASTORAL AND PSALM ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                                 POEMS

                          PASTORAL AND PSALM

                                  BY

                        REV. BENJAMIN COPELAND

                       [Illustration: colophon]

                        NEW YORK: EATON & MAINS
                     CINCINNATI: CURTS & JENNINGS

                             Copyright by
                            EATON & MAINS,
                                 1896.

                         EATON & MAINS PRESS,
                      150 Fifth Avenue, New York.




                                POEMS:

                          PASTORAL AND PSALM.




     THE FIRST ROBIN.


    Herald of the happy year,
    Robin redbreast, art thou here?
    Welcome to thy destined goal;
    Welcome, songster of the soul!

    Age and Childhood find in thee
    Kindred bond of sympathy;
    Hope and Memory are one
    In thy song’s sweet unison.

    Common freehold all hearts claim
    In thy nature’s artless aim;
    Best of priests and poets, thou,
    Singing on the leafless bough.

    Mead and mountain, wood and wold,
    Wait the rapture manifold,
    Which shall prove thee saint and seer,
    Dearest minstrel of the year!

    Every note like April rain--
    Thou transmutest, in thy strain,
    With the season’s subtle power,
    Winter’s dearth to summer’s dower.

    Glows the mold with vernal fire
    Kindled by thy love’s desire;
    Nature wakens, at thy call,
    To her Easter festival.

    Mateless messenger divine!
    Peerless privilege is thine:
    Thou interpretest to Faith
    The deep mystery of death.




     THE MEADOW AIR IS SWEET.


    The meadow air is sweet,--
      The cowslip’s cup of gold
    Is full of fresh and fragrant dew,--
      More full than it can hold.

    The meadow air is sweet,--
      The blackbird’s mellow note,
    Like water in a little brook,
      Flows gurgling from his throat.

    The meadow air is sweet,--
      The stream that cheers the lea
    Will feel the willow’s tender kiss,
      E’en to the distant sea.

    The meadow air is sweet,--
      Hark! from the old elm tree--
    Ah! only lovers understand
      The oriole’s ecstasy.

    The meadow air is sweet,--
      The clover, handsome--white,
    With dainty odors woos the bee,
      And fills her with delight.

    The meadow air is sweet,--
      The bobolink is there!
    When he is mute a faery flute
      Seems echoing in the air.

    The meadow air is sweet,--
      The daisy in the grass
    Looks up to see the clouds, and feel
      Their shadow as they pass.

    The meadow air is sweet,--
      The swallow flashes by,
    Too merry for a moment’s rest
      Between the earth and sky.

    The meadow air is sweet,--
      The day wanes in the west,
    And twilight’s soothing shadows lull
      The weary world to rest.




     A CONTRAST.


    In the green silence of this sylvan shore
    How servile seems the city’s ceaseless roar!
    How vain the restless rivalry for pelf!
    How low the aim that centers all in self!

    The penury of Pride--the sordid care
    Of souls despoiled of poetry and prayer--
    Seems in these happy shades to be
    The comedy of misery.




     THE GOAL.


    Sweet scents, sweet sounds, sweet scenes!
    With all that intervenes
      In sweeter solemn silences profound,--
    Whereinto overflows,
    In forest, river, rose,
      Passionless being, beauty without bound.

    How deep the mind’s repose!
    The vagrant sea breeze blows
      With kindred pulses through the fragrant shade;
    And sod and soul are blent
    In blest enfranchisement,--
      Prefiguring the end for all things made.

    For life and love, supreme
    Beyond Isaiah’s dream,
      Shall bear all being to its blissful goal;
    The wondrous word is true:
    “Lo! I make all things new;”--
      _The universe is ransomed with the soul_.




     UNANSWERED.


    Whither away, ye argosies of Heaven,
    In solemn state advancing from afar?
    What mission marshals you? What chivalrous emprise
    Darkens the glory of the sapphire skies?
    Say, was your empire’s ancient quiet riven
    With rumor ominous of distant wrong and war?
    Or speed ye forth with snowy sails unfurled,
    And radiant pennons shimmering in the haze,
    To bring with proper pomp, to his empyreal throne,
    Your monarch with his bride?--_he loveth her alone_,--
    Dear daughter of the Sun, the peerless virgin world,
    Long cloistered in his bosom’s brightest rays.

        *       *       *       *       *

    No answer but a deeper shadow cast,--
    And lo! the splendid mystery has passed.




     EASTER ANTICIPATED.


    Hark! ’tis the Robin, poet-priest,
      Absolves rude Winter’s wrong:
    The heart of Nature is released,
      And soareth out in song.




     UNDER THE MOON.


    Beautiful Luna, bride of the night!
    Sweet is the sheen of thy soft silver light;
    On castle and cottage in splendor it streams,
    Blessing the earth with its bountiful beams.

    Thou cheerest the vigils of shepherd and seer;
    To sailor and lover alike thou art dear;
    Forever and ever thy kingdom shall be:--
    The heart owns thy sway like the tides of the sea.




     HEART’S-EASE.


    The day will not give place to night,--
    The darkness pierces like the light;
    My care prolongs the noontide glare,
    And makes a desert everywhere.
    O! what will ease a burning brain,
    And the weariness that is worse than pain?

         *       *       *       *       *

    Think of twilight and the dew,--
    The stars serenely shining through
    The tranquil depths of peaceful blue;
    Muse on the moon’s majestic grace;
    How worshipful her radiant face
      In midnight’s solemn loneliness!
    Nature is silent unto God--
    His comforts are exceeding broad.

         *       *       *       *       *

    Receive the word his works declare:
    “The peace of God is everywhere.”
    Too weak for praise, too faint for prayer,
    The benediction of the air
    Be thine whose lot it is to share
    Life’s ceaseless, slow-corroding care.
    Be still, and breathe the balm divine,
    Arcturus’ joy, Orion’s wine;
    So shalt thou know the blessed law
    Whence stars their strength and beauty draw,
    Inheriting their influence
    In quietness and confidence,
    And ever, cheerfully as they,
    Press onward in thy heavenward way.




     THE REWARD.


    From green to gold
    The year grows old,
      With beautiful increase;
    The seasons wane
    To ripened grain
      And Nature’s deepest peace.

    The same sure plan
    Is thine, O man!
      Alike for sod and soul,
    The law of love--
    Enthroned above--
      That guides thee to thy goal.

    _Have faith in God_;--
    Who gives the clod
      Its meed of fruit or flower.
    Shall crown thy cares,
    Thy tears, thy prayers,
      With an immortal dower.




     STRUGGLE AND REST.


    My life was overcast with care,
    And doubt pursued me everywhere;
    Still farther into gloom unknown
    I wandered desolately lone,
    Till, in the depths of self-despair,
    The darkness deepened into prayer;
    And lo! when hope was almost gone,
    The midnight brightened into dawn.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Around my heart was drawn the coil
    Of cheerless, unrelenting toil;
    Nor any respite could I find,
    Nor any comfort for the mind,
    When His dear cross appeared to me,
    Whose service is true liberty;--
    The thought of Jesus brought me rest,
    And meekness made my burden blest.




     COMPENSATION.


    Deep calleth unto deep;--the heart
    That dwelleth from the world apart
      Is sometimes doubly sad;
    But lo! the light that overflows!
    The desert blossoms like the rose,--
      The wilderness is glad!

    The faith serene, the lofty cheer,
    The love triumphant over fear,--
      A paradise below!
    Such is the treasure each may find,
    (The rapture of a quiet mind,)
      And such, in part, bestow.




     BETRAYED.


    Deceived, defloured, despoiled!
      O drooping lily, late with light aglow!
    Around thy root is coiled
      The hidden horror of a nameless woe.

    Deceived, defiled, despoiled!
      Is there no healing for a broken heart?
    O God! hadst thou but foiled
      The fatal spell of the betrayer’s art.

    Deceived, despised, despoiled!
      The blight has fallen on thy peerless bloom;
    To bless thy bridal eager ages toiled;--
      A moment’s glamour leaves thee endless gloom.




     MIDNIGHT AND MORNING.


    Under her heart her sorrow,
      Under her heart her shame,--
    And darker than death the morrow
      With the brand of the whole world’s blame.

        *       *       *       *       *

    Under her heart her glory,--
      O rapture that knows no alloy!
    Blest Mary! thy travail’s sweet story
      Shall waken the whole world’s joy.




     OTHER SHEEP.


    Pagan, Papist, Protestant!
      What is that to thee or me?
    Make not Heaven’s mercy scant
      With thy pampered bigotry.

    Who made thee the judge to be
    Of thy brother’s destiny?
    Deem not that thy shibboleth
    Holds the keys of life and death.

    Ah, that secret, sullen sign!
    Call it not decree divine;
    For a letter, more, or less,
    Measures not God’s tenderness.

    “Other sheep I have,” said One
    Who was more than Mary’s son;
    Eyes as blind as thine shall see
    His amazing charity.

    When it claims the judgment throne,
      What is creed but craft and cant?
    God will surely know his own--
      Pagan, Papist, Protestant.




     NIAGARA.


    Majestic symbol of eternal power!
      Dread oracle of eons all unknown!
    Before thy presence Pomp and Passion cower,--
      All men are equal at thy awful throne.

    Abashed, the eager babble of the mart,
      To silence shamed, the vulgar greed for gain;
    No more ambition goads the weary heart,
      And Toil forgets its unrequited pain.

    Stern type of Truth’s inexorable law!
      No room remains for envy or for pride;
    Here prince and pauper stand in common awe,
      Swayed by the spell of thy resistless tide.

    A rushing, seething Sinai,--thou dost pour
      On sluggish consciences the solemn sense
    Of justice infinite: thy thunder’s roar
      Declares to Wrong relentless recompense.

    Against our arrogance thy strength doth plead;
      Deep unto deep imperiously calls;
    Impartial annalist! the nations read
      Their transient glory on thy ageless walls.

    Yet dost thou deign to dower the moment’s need,--
      Our dreams exceeding by thy bounteous sway;
    With power unrivaled thy proud flood shall speed
      The New World’s progress toward Time’s perfect day.

    O mighty monitor! O seer sublime!
      The soul’s surpassing grandeur thou dost show;
    The fountains of thy immemorial prime
      Through man’s immortal being freely flow.




     LET IN THE LIGHT!


    Let in the light!
    The sky is bright,
      The air is flowing free;
    The mountains glow,
    The vale, below,
      Is holding jubilee.

    Let in the light!--
    Sad oversight
      To miss so sweet a morn;
    The vision flies,
    Awake! arise!
      Each dawn is life reborn.

    Let in the light!
    O! read aright
      The day’s Apocalypse;
    Its hours enfold
    The age of gold,
      And all thy dreams eclipse.

    Let in the light!
    ’Twill soon be night;
      Prize every moment given;
    With all thy might
    Serve thou the right,
      And leave the rest to Heaven.




     THE LAW OF LOVE.


    O, the sky is blue above me,
      And the earth beneath is green,
    And softly bright the flowing light
      Floods the boundless space between.

    But what if the day should darken,
      And death’s dread shadows fall?
    I need not fear; with heaven so near,
      Why should the night appall?

    ’Tis but the peaceful portal
    Unto a morn immortal;
    For the light that once gladdened the garden’s deep gloom
    At last shall transfigure all blight into bloom.

    For over and under the soul’s sore strife
    Is the blessed law of an endless life;
    From the sod to the stars, and the stars to the sod,
    Sways the everlasting love of God.




     A PROPHECY.


    O happy, happy, happy boy!
    Let me tell you all your joy;
    Let me whisper in your ear
    All the secret of the seer.
    Let me tell your fortune fair
    To the wide and wandering air;
    Let me share my rapture rare
    With the social, songful air,--
    With the gentle, genial air,
    Kind to laughter and to prayer.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Whatsoe’er the world may say,
    You shall have the right of way:
    You shall laugh, and you shall play,
    And, in merry roundelay,
    Dance with jolly faun and fay;
    You shall have the wealth of May
    For your dowry every day.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Nature, from her frailest spar
    To her oldest, utmost star,
    All her miracles shall bring
    For your blissful wondering;--
    You shall be her priest and king.
    Knowing what was never known,
    Reaping what was never sown,
    You shall feel the world your own,
    On your universal throne.
    And, in holy place apart,
    (Blessed are the pure in heart!)
    In a halo of delight,
    Jubilant with glorious might,
    You shall walk with God in white.

        *       *       *       *       *

    This is all was shown to me
    Of the child’s futurity;
    What the youth and man will be--
    Sealed is in mystery.
    Scarcely can his angel see,
    Face to face with Deity,
    Farther into certainty.
    _God exceed the prophecy!_
    God be better to the boy
    Than the parent’s dream of joy.




     LITTLE RUTH.


    I cannot feel that she is gone
      So far, so far away;
    Her little heart close to my own
      Is beating day by day.

    Ah! tender are these human ties;
      May heaven at last reveal
    Why on her eyes a slumber lies
      E’en tears cannot unseal.

    A look this darkness would displace
      With a divine delight;
    The soul’s rare grace in her fair face.
      It was a blessed sight!

    Her hair a happy halo wore
      That lit the hearth and hall;
    Alas! no more my study door
      Heeds her confiding call.

    Dear lips! where mirth and music wrote
      The lore in Eden sung;
    Seemed every note from her sweet throat
      By elf or angel strung.

    The robin, hark! is here again,
      To woo the wondrous child;
    But all in vain his ardent strain,--
      Death may not be beguiled.

    Sleep, Baby, sleep; we will not weep,
      Nor moan or murmur make;
    But O! how deep the dreamless sleep!
      Would God she might awake.

    Asleep? awake! the Shepherd takes
      His little lamb above;
    And where she wakes the morning breaks
      In everlasting love.

        *       *       *       *       *

    But I cannot feel that she is gone
      So far, so far away;
    For her little heart close to my own
      Keeps beating day by day.




     WHERE THERE IS NO MORE PAIN.


    The sharpest pang, the tenderest tear,
      Not yet are known to thee,
    Unless thy heart has learned how dear
      A little grave can be.

    A little grave--but O, how wide
      The room it left for grief!
    A grief which, like the ebbing tide,
      Returns without relief.

    Dear child! by death made doubly dear,
      God grant it may not be
    That thou in heaven should’st ever hear
      How much we mourn for thee.

    One after one the seasons wane,--
      Our loss, it grows not less;
    Time’s balm is vain to heal the pain
      Of such a loneliness.

    O little grave, that darkened so
      The path by Sorrow trod,
    Sometimes the sunset’s golden glow
      Rests on thy daisied sod;--

    And then we feel that God is good,
      And we take heart again,
    Assured ’twill all be understood
      Where there is no more pain.

    Where there is no more pain--’tis there,
      ’Tis there we long to be;
    O Thou, who didst our sorrows bear,
      Bring us to dwell with thee!

    Where there is no more pain--how blest
      Love’s kingdom, fadeless, fair!
    That blissful rest naught shall molest,--
      _Death cannot enter there_.




     AMONG THE LILIES.


    Among the lilies she lies asleep,
      Our Easter lily, so fair and sweet,--
    A flower too fair and frail to keep
      Where love with sorrow and pain must meet.

    Among the lilies in Paradise
      (O sweeter than Eden, God’s garden above!)
    Stands a little child,--and the same dear eyes
      Look up into ours with immortal love.

    Among the lilies! Lord, grant that we
      With the pure in heart thy face may see,
    And find with our loved and our lost a home
      Where pain and sorrow can never come.




     FORGOTTEN?


    By ties as tender as our tears
      Our hearts still hold to thee;--
    Dear child! death cannot blight the years
      Of immortality.




                       “IN THE BEGINNING, GOD.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

            “In Him we live, and move, and have our being.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

                              OUR FATHER.




     ADORATION.


    Sole Source of being, blessed God!
      Of love the Fountain and the Sea,
    Thy glorious name alone we laud,--
      Our springs, O Lord, are all in thee.

    In all our paths thy truth we trace,--
      Thy goodness, infinite, unknown;
    Our everlasting dwelling place,
      In thee we live, in thee alone.

    To children’s children still endure
      Thy ceaseless care, thy changeless love;
    Thy covenanted mercies, sure,
      Shall never, nevermore remove.

    O happiness without alloy!
      We soon with all thy saints shall come,
    With songs and everlasting joy,
      To Zion, our eternal home.

    O holy, holy, holy Lord!
      To thee be endless glory given;
    O be thy name by all adored,
      For evermore, in earth and heaven.




     CONFIDING IN GOD.


    From thy commandments, Lord,
      O let me never stray;
    According to thy word
      Do thou direct my way.

    Be every moment near,--
      Alone I dare not go,--
    And with thy presence cheer
      My pilgrimage below.

    Forever in thy sight,
      No harm can happen me;
    The darkness and the light
      Are both alike to thee.

    E’en death shall serve thy will,--
      Controlled by thy command;
    No change can work me ill,--
      “My times are in thy hand.”

    In this I sweetly rest,--
      Instructed from above,--
    _Whatever is, is best_;
      For thou, O Lord, art love.




     PROVIDENCE.


    O God, our shield! our strong defense,
      Sure staff of souls distress’d,
    Beneath thy watchful providence,
      Thy saints securely rest.

    No want have they who seek thy face;
      No good wilt thou withhold
    From them that walk in righteousness,
      The flock of thine own fold.

    From strength to strength thy servants go,
      Delighting in thy will;
    Triumphant over every foe,
      They stand on Zion’s hill.

    Forever blessèd be thy name,--
      And let the whole earth be
    The temple of thy glorious fame,
      And thy salvation see.




     ANNIVERSARY PRAISE.


    O sovereign Love, eternal Power!
    Whose grace hath brought us to this hour,
    Thy covenanted mercies, sure,
    To children’s children still endure.

    Our fathers’ God! to thee we raise
    In cheerful song our grateful praise,--
    And laud and magnify and bless
    Thy everlasting faithfulness.

    For blessings on our infant days,
    For guidance through life’s later maze,
    For present good, for hope of heaven,
    To thee be endless glory given.

    Our children, Lord, with pious care,
    We consecrate to thee in prayer;
    O, be thou tender to our tears,--
    O, be thou better than our fears.

    In all our pilgrimage below,
    O, may thy presence with us go;
    And grant us grace henceforth to be
    In sweetest fellowship with thee.

    For service, or for suffering, Lord,
    In thee we seek our sole reward,--
    Content, in life and death, to prove
    The comforts of redeeming love.




     OUT OF THE DEPTHS.


    Almighty Sovereign of the sea,
    Make known thy matchless majesty;
    Rebuke the raging of the deep,
    And bid its surging billows sleep.

    Great God, regard thy servants’ prayer,
    And grant us, still, thy gracious care;
    Spare us, O Lord; our lives prolong,
    And turn our sorrow into song.

    Out of the depths we cry to thee;
    O, let us thy salvation see!
    Thy tender pity may we prove,--
    Thy changeless, everlasting love.

    Through gloom and tempest guide our way;
    The sea is thine--it owns thy sway;
    The winds and waves obey thy will,
    Hushed when they hear thy “_Peace, be still!_”

    On thee alone our hope is stayed;
    O, be thou our unfailing aid,
    Till, in the haven of thy breast,
    We share thy saints’ eternal rest.




     THE SANCTUARY.


    How amiable thy courts!
      Thy temple, Lord, how fair!
    How pleasant, still, to lowly hearts,
      Thy tabernacles are.

    Thither the tribes go up,--
      Thy chosen Israel,--
    With voice of saintly jubilee
      Thy faithfulness to tell.

    How excellent they stand,
      The gates of praise and prayer!
    Would God my weary, fainting soul
      Might dwell forever there.

    Before the mercy seat
      We find our faith’s reward:
    A heart made holy to behold
      The beauty of the Lord.

    Thy ceaseless love, O Christ,
      Our pilgrimage shall cheer,
    Till, crowned with everlasting joy,
      In glory we appear.




     “IN QUIET RESTING PLACES.”


    More rest we want, O God!
      More rest from self and sin,
    More silence for serener thought,
      The soul’s true goal to win.

    Without, the strife of tongues,
      Within, a wayward will;--
    O Jesus, Saviour! speak, and say,
      “Peace, troubled heart, be still.”

    In quiet confidence
      We then shall sweetly rest,
    And in thy gentleness, O Lord,
      For evermore be blest.




     THE SEASONS ARE THY SERVANTS.


    The seasons are thy servants, Lord!
      Obedient to thy will,
    Thy everlasting covenant
      They faithfully fulfill.

    The seasons are thy servants, Lord!
      Summer and winter bring
    Rich blessings from thy gracious hand,--
      The bounty of the King.

    The seasons are thy servants, Lord!
      Why should thy children fear?
    With loving-kindness manifold
      Thou crownest every year.

    The seasons are thy servants, Lord!
      The sunshine and the rain;
    The seedtime and the harvest blend
      In our eternal gain.

    The seasons are thy servants, Lord!
      Thy changeless love we laud,
    And magnify, with grateful joy,
      The goodness of our God.




     ASPIRATION AND REST.


    O God, of love the _Fountain_ and the _Sea_!
    My fainting soul pants ceaselessly for thee;
    Earth’s bitter streams no comfort can supply,--
    For thee, for thee, the living God, I sigh.

    No more below my wayward wishes roam,--
    My heart, at last, is conscious of its home;
    My portion thou, my refuge and my rest;--
    O gracious Saviour, take me to thy breast.

    But O, my brothers! comfortless as I,--
    Alike we languish, and alike we die;
    Be merciful, O God, and hear the prayer
    Of every fainting spirit everywhere.

    In the dear shelter of thy tranquil breast,
    O Love divine, a weary world would rest;
    The whole creation travaileth for thee,
    O God, of love the Fountain and the Sea!




     THE LARGER LIFE.


    My years are very few, O God!
      More rapidly they pass
    Than clouds whose transient tale is told
      In shadows on the grass.

    My years are very few, O God!
      But they are full of thee,--
    A drop of being in thy life’s
      Unfathomable sea.

    My years are very few, O God!
      O, let me clearly see
    How they grow strong and beautiful
      In thy immensity.

    My years are very few, O God!
      The sum of them is small;
    But each may serve thy blessed will,
      And thou shalt have them all.

    My years are very few, O God!
      But, safe on sea or land,
    I confidently journey on,--
      My times are in thy hand.

    My years are very few, O God!
      On earth, but not in heaven;--
    To thee, eternal Life and Love,
      Be endless praises given.




                            CHRIST IN SONG.




     CHRISTMAS.


    O holy, happy morning,
      That saw the Saviour’s birth!
    The star, thy brow adorning,
      Beams mercy on the earth.
    For shepherds, and for sages,
      Thy cheer, impartial, free,--
    The travail of the ages
      Finds recompense in thee.

    My soul, be thou believing,--
      No more thy past deplore;
    In Christ all loss retrieving,
      Rejoice for evermore.
    By love unknown attended,
      Thy weary watch and ward,--
    Behold! the vision splendid!
      The angel of the Lord!

    And hark! the herald angel!
      The radiant, rapturous throng!
    The ravishing evangel
      Floods all the hills with song:
    “To God in heaven, glory,
      Good will to men below;”
    Speed, speed the blessed story,
      That all the world may know.

    Repeat it softly, slowly,
      For still, in hut and hall,
    Are lonely hearts, and lowly,
      That hunger for it all.
    Again--again the story!
      Till sin and sorrow cease--
    “To God, the Father, glory,
      And to his children, peace.”




     GOLD, AND FRANKINCENSE, AND MYRRH.


    Faithful, followed they the star
    Faintly glimmering afar,
    Till it rested o’er the way,
    Where the Lord of glory lay.

    Gold, and frankincense, and myrrh,
    Gave each regal worshiper,
    Seeing, in the Babe divine,
    Answer of the heavenly sign.

    Lo! again the star appears,
    Shining through our griefs and fears,--
    Dayspring of the desolate--
    Heaven stoops down to our estate!

    By the path the wise men trod,
    Seek we, too, th’ incarnate God;
    Blessed goal, where ends all strife:
    Christ, the Way, the Truth, the Life.

    Kneeling where the Magi knelt,
    Feeling what the Magi felt,--
    Of all nations the Desire,
    Lord, to thee our souls aspire.

    Hasten, heart of mine, to bring
    From thy store fit offering;
    Be a royal worshiper:
    _Gold, and frankincense, and myrrh_!




     GOOD FRIDAY.


    O outcast Christ, rejected King!
      O Man of sorrows, slain for me,
    Accept a sinner’s offering--
      A thankful heart that clings to thee.

    The purple robe, the taunt, the sneer,
      The crown of thorns, the scourge, the cross!
    Remembering these, O Saviour dear,
      I gladly reckon all things loss.

    Could grief of mine make meet redress
      For those dark hours of deepest woe,
    O Lamb of God! O Prince of Peace!
      My tears for evermore should flow.

    On thee, the sinless One, was laid
      The guilt of all mankind, _and mine_;
    Thy grace the ransom doubly paid
      In human agony divine.

    O Son of Mary! Son of God!
      Thou King of saints, enthroned above,
    Thy glorious name the world shall laud,
      And crown thy cross with wreaths of love.




     THE RESURRECTION.


    Relentless as the council is the cross;
      The Nazarene is bruised and torn;--
      Mourn! ye despised disciples, mourn!
    Priest, scribe, and elder triumph in your loss.

    The watch is set,--the sepulcher is sure;
      Death and the grave and Rome unite--
      Triumvirate of matchless might--
    To make Sin’s vaunted victory secure.

    Secure? With sudden awe the aged earth
      _Feels him alive within the tomb_;
      And lo! emerging from the gloom,
    The brightest morning since creation’s birth!

    The nations see the Dayspring from on high,
      And greet the mighty miracle
      With songs that shake the gates of hell,
    And animate the anthems of the sky.




     EASTER-TIDE.


    Easter bells are ringing,
      Easter anthems rise,
    Age and Childhood singing
      Strains that seek the skies:
    Seek their source, ascending
      Where, in rapture sweet,
    Song and service blending,
      Saint and seraph meet.

    “Christ, the Lord, is risen!”
      Wondering angels cry;
    “Broken, Death’s dread prison!”
      Sons of men reply.
    Blessed song and story!
      Doubt and fear depart,--
    Resurrection glory
      Floods the faithful heart.

    Purest, purest pleasure
      In each bosom wells;
    Happy, happy measure--
      How the choral swells!

    By that song supplanted,
      Wrath and wrong shall cease;
    From this hour undaunted
      Reigns the Prince of Peace.

    Easter lilies, blowing,
      Breathe his praise abroad,--
    All their grace bestowing
      On the Son of God.
    Lo! his brow adorning,
      Kings their homage pay;
    Hark! the stars of morning
      Hail his boundless sway.




     THE SURE FOUNDATION.


    A strong and sure foundation
      Is Jesus Christ, the Lord,--
    Before the world’s creation
      The everlasting Word!
    His power, supreme, unbounded,
      He pledges to his own;
    On him their hope is grounded
      Securely as God’s throne.

    What though the tempest rages?
      No harm his cause sustains;
    Built on the Rock of Ages,
      Unmoved the Church remains.

    His word shall stand forever,--
      Nor shall one letter fail:
    “The gates of hell shall never
      Against my Church prevail.”

    From God all grace receiving,
      The saints, below, above,
    In Christ their King believing,
      Shall triumph through his love.
    O happy, happy Zion!
      The Lamb, for sinners slain,
    Is Judah’s mighty Lion,
      Who shall forever reign!

    The Rock of our salvation,--
      To thee, O Christ, we raise,
    In grateful adoration,
      The voice of prayer and praise;
    Our common faith confessing,
      Thy cross the world shall crown
    With glory, honor, blessing,
      And infinite renown.




     LIGHT OF LIGHT.


    Of transient symbol the eternal Truth,
      In thee, O Christ, the soul’s sure light we find;
    Vision and dream of Age and eager Youth,
      Thou pourest heaven on every humble mind.




     ALL IN ALL.


    O Lily, Rose, and Fountain!
      O Dayspring from above!
    O Sun, and Sea, and Mountain--
      Immeasurable Love!
    Sweet Jesus, Shepherd, Saviour,
      May we thy glory see,
    And share thy joy forever,
      Incarnate Deity!




     A MISSIONARY LYRIC.


        Lamb of the riven side,--
        Lord of lords glorified!
    Victim and Victor, thee we adore;
        Shepherd of Israel,
        Saviour from death and hell,
    Mighty Immanuel! reign evermore.

        Lion of Judah,
        From Brahm and from Buddha
    Seize for thy glory the sea and the land;
        Where age-long error thralls,
        Where blackest night appalls,
    There, with her radiant walls, let Zion stand.

        The gates of the morning,
        Thy temple adorning,
    Shall beacon the uttermost isles of the sea;
        And nations, now unknown,
        Shall bow before thy throne,
    And thee their Sovereign own, with saintly jubilee.

        Orient and Occident,
        Hail Him the Father sent!
    Greet him with shoutings and joyfully sing;
        On love’s blest mission bent,
        Through Death’s wide realm he went
    Conq’ror omnipotent; crown him your King!

        Martyr with gory brow,
        Monarch in glory, now,
    Victim and Victor, thee we adore;
        Shepherd of Israel,
        Saviour from death and hell,
    Mighty Immanuel! reign evermore.




     IN THE MORNING, JESUS.


    In the morning, Jesus,
      Let me see thy face,
    Altogether lovely,
      Full of truth and grace.

    In the morning, Jesus,
      Let me hear thy voice;
    Speak, and let thy servant
      All the day rejoice.

    In the morning, Jesus,
      Manifest thy love,--
    Peace, and power, and blessing,
      Bringing from above.

    In the morning, Jesus,
      Show thy cross to me;
    Then, dear Lord, I’ll suffer
      Cheerfully for thee.

    Every morning, Jesus,
      Every evening, bless;
    Shelter me forever
      With thy righteousness.

   *       *       *       *       *

    In the morning, Jesus,
      When thy saints shall rise,
    Bring me, with the blessed,
      Into Paradise.




     PENITENTIAL.


    At thy cross; O Christ, to thee
    Low I bow the suppliant knee;
    Cast, O, cast me not away,--
    Help a fainting soul to pray.

    Sinful, sorrowful, I wait
    For a look compassionate;
    Surely thou wilt pity one
    So forsaken and undone.

    Tell me, Jesus, if it be
    That thy blood was shed for me;
    In thy wounds, O, let me see
    Pardon, peace, and purity!

    From the uttermost degree
    Of a sinner’s misery,
    Mighty Victor, rescue me;
    Set my captive spirit free.

    O that I might have a place
    In the kingdom of thy grace!
    There the penitent are blest,--
    There the weary are at rest.

    Saviour, may I call thee mine?
    Yes,--for thou dost own me thine;
    Lo, ’tis written in my heart--
    Mine, forever mine, thou art.

    Unto thee be glory given
    Evermore in earth and heaven;
    Be thy name by all adored,
    Holy, holy, holy Lord!




     “FAINT, YET PURSUING.”


    Breathe on us thy benediction,
      Lord of glory, Prince of Peace!
    Comfort us in our affliction,
      Bid our fears and doubtings cease.
    Shepherd of our souls and Saviour,
      Who, alone, the wine press trod,
    Well thou knowest the world’s behavior,
      Man of sorrows, Lamb of God!

    Therefore, in their tribulation,
      Turn thy weary saints to thee,
    Seeking, in thy sure salvation,
      Peace and power and victory.
    Strangers here, and pilgrims lowly,
      Eagerly we follow thee,
    Longing to be with the holy
      Who in heaven thy glory see.

    Often faint, yet still pursuing,
      All thy footsteps would we trace,
    Day by day our hope renewing,
      Till we see thee face to face.

    There, thy glorious throne surrounding,--
      Every pain and peril past,--
    We will sing thy grace abounding,
      _More than conquerors at last_.




     SALUS PER CHRISTUM.


    Come, thou Desire of nations, come,
      And make thy promised kingdom sure;
    Establish in our hearts the throne
      Which shall eternally endure.

    In poverty and pain we wait
      Thy glorious coming from above;
    Make haste, O Christ, compassionate,
      Make haste, make haste, Immortal Love!

    Come, in thy plenitude of grace,
      And satisfy thy people’s need;
    Come, in the greatness of thy strength,
      And make us, Jesus, free indeed.

    Grant us thy peace, dear Son of God;--
      To us the Holy Ghost be given;
    In thee the Father’s fullness dwells,--
      All, all is thine, in earth and heaven.

    Infinite power belongs to thee,--
      Thou hast the keys of death and hell;
    Thy kingdom come, thy will be done,
      Our Lord, our God,--Immanuel!




     SUPPLICATION.


    Jesus, King of kings, most holy,
    Pity us in station lowly,--
    Lonely pilgrims, wending slowly
      Toward the city where thou dwellest.

    Thou dost see us, weak and weary,
    In the wilderness so dreary,
    Mourning that we are not near thee,
      In thy home so fair and blissful.

    Yet thy promises do cheer us;
    And thy Spirit, ever near us,
    Bids us pray, for thou wilt, hear us,
      And afford us help and comfort.

    Hear thou, now, our supplication,
    And relieve our sore privation
    With the strength of thy salvation,
      King eternal and almighty!

    Mercifully guard and guide us,
    Lest the curse of sin betide us,
    And an entrance be denied us
      To thy glorious palace golden.

    Once for sinners bruised and wounded,
    Now by heavenly hosts surrounded--
    All thine enemies confounded--
      Be thou evermore our Saviour.




     IN THY LIKENESS.


    On my heart engrave thy cross,
      Blessed Saviour, Love divine!
    Evermore, in gain or loss,
      Let me bear that sacred sign.

    In my heart thy love enthrone;
      More and more thy rule increase;
    Thine the kingdom, thine alone,
      Lord of glory, Prince of Peace!

    To my heart--no longer mine--
      Grant the fullness of thy grace;
    Living, dying, own me thine,
      Till I see thee face to face.

    With thy likeness crowned at last,
      O, what rapture it will be,
    When the night of death is past,
      Evermore to dwell with thee.




     THE LIGHT OF LIFE.


    O Jesus, sole, sufficient source
      Of hope that heals the sad heart’s strife,
    Direct us on our darkened course,
      Thyself the Way, the Truth, the Life.

    Thou knowest the way we take, O Lord!
      Didst thou not prove its painful length?
    Help of the helpless, still afford
      Thy pitying love, thy tender strength.

    In every trial, every care,
      Thy patient footsteps may we see;
    The sorrows of thy cross to share
      Shall then our joy and glory be.

    Secure in thy unchanging love,
      No toil, no suffering will we flee,
    Assured that death itself shall prove
      The path that leads to heaven and thee.




     CHRISTUS CONSOLATOR.


    In the day of tribulation,
    In the hour of sore temptation,
    With the strength of thy salvation,
      Jesus, Saviour, comfort me.

    When no more the heart may borrow
    Hope and courage from the morrow,--
    In the darkest depths of sorrow,
      Jesus, Saviour, comfort me.

    When all aid is unavailing,
    Flesh and heart together failing,
    Sin and death the soul assailing,--
      Jesus, Saviour, comfort me.

    On thy word alone relying,--
    Never thy dear name denying,--
    O, forsake me not when dying!
      Jesus, Saviour, comfort me.

    Crowned, at last, in light supernal,
    Victor over foes infernal,--
    With thy love, supreme, eternal,
      Jesus, Saviour, comfort me.




     HOLY SPIRIT, HEAVENLY GUEST!


    Holy Spirit, heavenly Guest,
    Make thy home within my breast;
    Yearns for thee my weary heart,--
    Come, and nevermore depart.

    Where thou dwellest peace abides,--
    Grace surpassing all besides,--
    Priceless treasure, pure and blest,
    Earnest of eternal rest.

    God’s dear will be done in me
    Even as it pleaseth thee;
    Only let me fully prove
    The sweet comfort of thy love.

    Cheerfully, for Jesus’ sake,
    May I every burden take,--
    Glad to trace the pathway trod
    By the suffering Son of God.

    Blessed Comforter and Guide,
    Keep me near the Saviour’s side,
    Till I in his likeness rise,
    Crowned with bliss beyond the skies.




     HOLY SPIRIT, LIGHT DIVINE!


    Holy Spirit, Light divine!
    On our souls in mercy shine;
    Gates of heaven again unfold;--
    Haste, for Time is waxing old.

    On the Church of Jesus shower
    All thy plenitude of power;
    Heal earth’s bitterness and strife
    With the Saviour’s love and life.

    Over all created things
    Brooded, once, thy blessèd wings;
    Groans the world with grief and pain
    Dove divine! descend again.




      “THE DAY OF CHRIST.”


      The Son of man will come,--
        His promise cannot fail;
      The royal Conqueror
        Shall over all prevail;
    And Earth shall hear his summons dread,
    And Death and Hell give up their dead.

      Ten thousand thousand saints
        His coming shall attend,--
      And underneath his feet
        The firmament shall rend;
    And, prostrate at his judgment throne,
    The world his sovereignty shall own.

      O Son of Mary! hear
        A helpless sinner’s prayer,
      And, on that awful day,
        Make me thy gracious care;
    O, be my heart’s sure hope and stay
    When the wide heavens shall flee away.

      Keep faithful watch, my soul,
        And pray “Thy kingdom come;”
      But leave it all to Him,
        How he shall bring thee home;
    The resurrection of the just
    Shall recompense thy patient trust.




     THE CONSUMMATION.


    O Saviour, whose surpassing grace
      Exceeds the guilt thy griefs atoned,
    The praises of a ransomed race
      Be thine, in highest heaven enthroned.

    The Father’s everlasting love
      Thy blessed life and death declare;
    And still, though crowned with bliss above,
      Our deepest sorrows thou dost share.

    O Jesus, merciful and kind,
      The sad and sinful seek thy breast;
    Our souls in thee their solace find,--
      Our refuge thou, our only rest.

    The goal is sure, O Guide divine!
      Again the stars of morning sing;
    All wills, all worlds, at last are thine,
      O Christ, Creator, Saviour, King!




     ALL SAINTS.


    Ten thousand times ten thousand,--
      Their shining ranks I see!
    With robes of light resplendent,
      And palms of victory!

    The crowns they wear are golden,
      And gemmed with jewels rare,--
    Fair guerdon of the glory
      They with their Saviour share.

    Their home--the holy city,
      Within whose ageless walls
    No shade of sin, or sickness,
      Or sorrow, ever falls;
    For _He_ is ever with them,
      The Lamb, their life, their light,--
    The joy of all the ransomed,
      The saints’ supreme delight.

    Dear vision of the blessèd--
      How homelike heaven seems!
    Sweet foretaste of the rapture
      Exceeding all our dreams.
    O Jesus, Shepherd, Saviour,
      My guide and guardian be,
    And bring me, through thy favor,
      To dwell with them and thee.




     OUR LIFE IS LENT.


    Our life is Lent:
    Our years are spent
      In penance for the past;
    Our songs are sighs,
    Our brightest skies
      With clouds are overcast.

    Our life is Lent:
    The old lament--
      “All, all is vanity;”
    And Youth, in tears,
    Awaits with fears
      The morrow’s mystery.

    Our life is Lent:
    Lord, we repent
      Each folly, fault, and fall;
    Our best resolve
    Do thou absolve,--
      Forgive, forget it all.

    Our life is Lent:
    Our hearts are rent,
      As we thy gifts recount,
    And mark again,
    With bitter pain,
      “The pattern in the mount.”

    Our life is Lent:
    Our strength is spent;
      O holy Judge, and just,
    Receive our prayer,--
    Poor sinners spare;
      Remember we are dust!

    Our life is Lent:
    But Jesus went
      This way; in him confide;
    ’Twill soon be past;
    Then, for thy fast,
      _Eternal Easter-tide!_




     IT DOTH NOT YET APPEAR.


    “It doth not yet appear what we shall be;”
      The goal, the crown, but dimly we discern,--
    For evermore from sin and sorrow free,
      In that blest world for which we often yearn.

    “It doth not yet appear what we shall be;”
      Eye hath not seen, nor was it ever told--
    The height of honor we shall share with Thee,
      Enthroned in light and rapture manifold.

    “It doth not yet appear what we shall be,”--
      Redeemed from death and glorified above;
    Enough, dear Lord, that we shall be like thee,
      In that eternal life of cloudless love.




     THE RAINBOW ROUND THE THRONE.


    The sunshine and the shadow--alternately they flow
    Across the fields of ether, across our hearts below;
    The gloom and glory blending in beauty manifold,
    The mists of morning ending in evening’s gates of gold.

    Forever and forever our human lives are so--
    The sunshine and the shadow, alternate weal and woe;
    Perpetually ascending, earth’s mingled mirth and moan,--
    But lo! above us bending, the rainbow round the throne!

    Hold fast the heavenly vision; this hope thy soul sustain--
    All things shall work together for thy eternal gain;
    The mystery of sorrow, the mystery of pain,
    Shall sure, some happy morrow, to every heart be plain.





End of Project Gutenberg's Poems: Pastoral and Psalm, by Benjamin Copeland

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS: PASTORAL AND PSALM ***

***** This file should be named 51367-0.txt or 51367-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/3/6/51367/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
